DEV: (cmds + etc) add XNACK command page and general info. (#2992)
redis/docs: content/commands/xnack.md

## Required arguments

<details open><summary><code>key</code></summary>

Name of the stream.

</details>

<details open><summary><code>group</code></summary>

Name of the consumer group.

</details>

<details open><summary><code>mode</code></summary>

Controls the delivery counter adjustment. Must be one of:

- **SILENT**: Decrements the delivery counter by 1, essentially "undoing" the delivery increment. Use this for transient internal failures or graceful shutdown where the delivery "didn't count".
- **FAIL**: Keeps the current delivery counter value unchanged. Use this when the message is too complex for the current consumer but may work for others.
- **FATAL**: Sets the delivery counter to the maximum value (LLONG_MAX or ~9.22 X 10<sup>18</sup>), marking the message as permanently failed. Use this for invalid or suspected malicious messages.

</details>

<details open><summary><code>ids</code></summary>

> Block specifying the message IDs to release, where `numids` is the number of message IDs that follow, and `id [id ...]` represents the stream entry IDs to be released back to the group.

Reviewer: Might just be me, but I initially read "block" as a verb here and I had to think about it for a moment.

```suggestion
Block of arguments that specifies the message IDs to release, where `numids` is the number of message IDs that follow, and `id [id ...]` represents the stream entry IDs to be released back to the group.
```

  making them available for re-delivery.
syntax_fmt: "XNACK key group <SILENT | FAIL | FATAL> IDS\_numids id [id ...]\n  [RETRYCOUNT\_\
  count] [FORCE]"
title: XNACK
---

In the context of a stream consumer group, this command allows a consumer to explicitly release pending messages back to the group's Pending Entries List (PEL) without acknowledging them. Released messages become immediately available for re-delivery to other consumers in the group, eliminating the idle-timeout delay normally required for message recovery.

This is particularly useful in scenarios such as graceful consumer shutdown, transient failures, resource constraints, or poison message detection. The command provides three different modes that control how the delivery counter is adjusted, giving consumers fine-grained control over retry semantics.

## Required arguments

<details open><summary><code>key</code></summary>

Name of the stream.

</details>

<details open><summary><code>group</code></summary>

Name of the consumer group.

</details>

<details open><summary><code>mode</code></summary>

Controls the delivery counter adjustment. Must be one of:

> - **SILENT**: Decrements the delivery counter by 1, essentially "undoing" the delivery increment. Use this for transient internal failures or graceful shutdown where the delivery "didn't count".

Reviewer 2: internal failures --> internal failure on the consumer side while processing the message.
(for clarity)

I'm not sure about "transient". As an example, a consumer may be unable to access some service in order to process the message it had claimed. This problem can be transient or last for a long period, I don't think it matters.

("transient" appears in other places as well)

> - **FAIL**: Keeps the current delivery counter value unchanged. Use this when the message is too complex for the current consumer but may work for others.

Reviewer 2: "the message is too complex for the current consumer but may work for others."
I would prefer to generalize it a bit:
The current consumer failed processing this message (e.g., due to memory constraints). The root cause may be the message or the consumer (it is unclear), so the best strategy would be to let another consumer try to process it.

- **FATAL**: Sets the delivery counter to the maximum value (LLONG_MAX or ~9.22 X 10<sup>18</sup>), marking the message as permanently failed. Use this for invalid or suspected malicious messages.

</details>

<details open><summary><code>ids</code></summary>

Block of arguments that specifies the message IDs to release, where `numids` is the number of message IDs that follow, and `id [id ...]` represents the stream entry IDs to be released back to the group.

</details>

## Optional arguments

<details open><summary><code>RETRYCOUNT</code></summary>

> Directly sets the delivery counter to the specified value, overriding the mode-based adjustment. This gives explicit control over the retry counter regardless of the mode selected.

Reviewer 2: Please add: This is an internal argument that usually should not be used by consumers.

</details>

<details open><summary><code>FORCE</code></summary>

> Creates new unowned PEL entries for IDs that are not already in the group PEL. Each entry must exist in the stream. When `FORCE` creates an entry, the delivery counter is set to `0` (or to `RETRYCOUNT` if specified, or to `LLONG_MAX` if mode is `FATAL`). This option is primarily used internally for AOF rewrite and replication.

Reviewer 2: Please add: This is an internal argument that usually should not be used by consumers.

```

After NACKing, the messages appear with empty consumer in XPENDING:

```
> XPENDING mystream mygroup - + 10
1) 1) "1526569498055-0"
   2) ""
   3) (integer) -1
   4) (integer) 1
2) 1) "1526569498056-0"
   2) ""
   3) (integer) -1
   4) (integer) 1
```

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>Using SILENT mode for graceful shutdown</strong></summary>

```
> XNACK mystream mygroup SILENT IDS 1 1526569498055-0
(integer) 1
```

With SILENT mode, the delivery counter is decremented, effectively "undoing" the delivery.

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>Using FATAL mode for poison messages</strong></summary>

```
> XNACK mystream mygroup FATAL IDS 1 1526569498055-0
(integer) 1
```

This marks the message as permanently failed by setting the delivery counter to maximum value.

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>Using RETRYCOUNT option</strong></summary>

```
> XNACK mystream mygroup FAIL IDS 1 1526569498055-0 RETRYCOUNT 5
(integer) 1
```

Explicitly sets the delivery counter to 5, regardless of the mode.

</details>

## Behavior

When `XNACK` executes successfully, it:

1. **Disassociates** the entry from its owning consumer (sets `consumer = NULL`)

> 2. **Repositions** the entry to the head of the PEL time-ordered list (sets `delivery_time = 0`), making it immediately claimable with any `min-idle-time` threshold

Reviewer 2: That's a bit misleading. The entry is not put in the head of the PEL.

When a message is NACKed, it is:
- Marked as unowned (its last consumer is set to an empty string)
- Assigned a last delivery time of 0
- Placed at the end of the NACKed portion of the PEL

The head of the PEL is reserved for all NACKed messages, ordered FIFO among themselves, followed by pending messages that were neither ACKed nor NACKed in their existing order.

3. **Adjusts the delivery counter** according to the specified mode and options
4. **Makes the entry available** for immediate re-delivery via [`XREADGROUP`]({{< relref "/commands/xreadgroup" >}}) CLAIM, [`XCLAIM`]({{< relref "/commands/xclaim" >}}), or [`XAUTOCLAIM`]({{< relref "/commands/xautoclaim" >}})

NACKed messages are prioritized over other pending messages in the group's PEL, ensuring they are delivered before idle messages during claim operations.

## Notes

- `XNACK` will only process message IDs that exist in the consumer group's PEL. Messages that are not pending will be ignored and not counted in the return value.

> - The command creates a "NACK zone" at the head of the PEL where released messages are placed, ensuring they are prioritized for re-delivery.

Reviewer 2: called "nacked zone" above, but anyway, I prefer "the NACKed portion of the PEL".

Author: The use of NACK zone avoids awkward self-referential phrasing ("a NACKed portion of the PEL at the head of the PEL"). So here, I prefer what's there.

- Released messages have their delivery time set to 0, making them immediately claimable regardless of the `min-idle-time` parameter in claiming commands.
- Unlike [`XACK`]({{< relref "/commands/xack" >}}), this command does not remove messages from the PEL but instead makes them available for other consumers.

## Redis Software and Redis Cloud compatibility

| Redis<br />Software | Redis<br />Cloud | <span style="min-width: 9em; display: table-cell">Notes</span> |
|:----------------------|:-----------------|:------|
| <span title="Not supported">&#x274c; Standard</span><br /><span title="Not supported"><nobr>&#x274c; Active-Active</nobr></span> | <span title="Not supported">&#x274c; Standard</span><br /><span title="Not supported"><nobr>&#x274c; Active-Active</nobr></span> |  |

## Return information

{{< multitabs id="return-info"
    tab1="RESP2"
    tab2="RESP3" >}}

> [Integer reply]({{< relref "/develop/reference/protocol-spec#integers" >}}): The number of messages successfully released back to the group PEL. Messages that are not in the consumer group PEL will not be counted.

Reviewer 2: "the group PEL" and "the consumer group PEL" are the same thing. Maybe use the same terminology for clarity.

> XREADGROUP GROUP mygroup consumer1 STREAMS mystream >
1) 1) "mystream"
   2) 1) 1) "1526569498055-0"
         2) 1) "field"
            2) "value1"
      2) 1) "1526569498056-0"
         2) 1) "field"
            2) "value2"
> XNACK mystream mygroup FAIL IDS 2 1526569498055-0 1526569498056-0
(integer) 2
```

After NACKing, the messages appear with empty consumer in XPENDING:

```
> XPENDING mystream mygroup - + 10
1) 1) "1526569498055-0"
   2) ""
   3) (integer) -1
   4) (integer) 1
2) 1) "1526569498056-0"
   2) ""
   3) (integer) -1
   4) (integer) 1
```

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>Using SILENT mode for graceful shutdown</strong></summary>

```
> XNACK mystream mygroup SILENT IDS 1 1526569498055-0
(integer) 1
```

With SILENT mode, the delivery counter is decremented, effectively "undoing" the delivery.

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>Using FATAL mode for poison messages</strong></summary>

```
> XNACK mystream mygroup FATAL IDS 1 1526569498055-0
(integer) 1
```

This marks the message as permanently failed by setting the delivery counter to maximum value.

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>Using RETRYCOUNT option</strong></summary>

```

> > XNACK mystream mygroup FAIL IDS 1 1526569498055-0 RETRYCOUNT 5

Reviewer 2: Let's remove this example.
